# Pages and Tuples

## 3.1 Page Structure
* page header
* an array of item pointers
* free space
* items (row versions)
* special space

### Page Header
* Located in the lowest addresses and contains a **fixed** size.
* Stores info about the page:
  - Checksum
  - Size of all parts of the page

### Special Space
* Located at opposite end of the page (compared to the page header).
* Usage and content depends entirely on index type.

### Tuples
* See "Tuple", think Row. (Term from PostgreSQL's academic past)
* Actual data stored in the database; located prior to **special space**.
* MVCC - several versions of one and the same row.
* Indexes do NOT use MVCC mechanism;
  - Indexes reference all the available row versions.

### Item Pointers
* Array of pointers to **tuples** (Table of Contents)
* Located after the header.
* TID (six-byte Tuple Identifiers) consists of:
  - Page Number
  - Reference to Row Version located in the page
- Tuples could be identified by their offset from the start of a page.
- Moving tuples would break references, causing fragmentation and issues.
- PostgreSQL avoids this with indirect addressing:
  - Tuple identifier refers to a pointer number.
  - Pointer specifies the tuple's current offset.
- If the tuple moves, only the pointer is updated, not the identifier.

### Free Space
Free Space left between pointers and tuples.

<br /><br/>

## 3.2 Row Version Layout
* `xmin`,`xmax`: Transaction ID's used to differenciate between row versions (Tuples)
* `infomask`: Provides a set of information bits that define version properties.
* `ctid`: Pointer to next updated version of the same row.
* `null bitmap`: Array of bits marking columns that are NULL-able.

### Interesting Optimization - Discussion Point
Start tables with fixed-length columns that cannot contain NULL values.

<br /><br/>

## 3.3 Operations on Tuples
- `Xmin` & `Xmax` define "Validity time" for each **Tuple** version.
- Row creation, xmin value is set to the transaction ID of the INSERT command: { xmin: `txid`, xmax: `null` }
- Row deletion, xmax value of its current version set to the transaction ID of the DELETE command: { xmin: `..`, xmax: `txid` }
- Row updated (more expensive), creates a new tuple and marks previous version with xmax transaction ID along with a new Tuple version with xmin. In this case previous tuple version xmax == new tuple version xmin.

### Insert
* Check current transaction ID with: `SELECT pg_current_xact_id();`
* Variations of Transaction ID: [ xact, xact ID, TXID, XID ]
* Hidden page columns (shown by book how to query them)
  - `xmin_committed` & `xmin_aborted` determines whether xmin transaction is committed or aborted.
  - `xmax_committed` & `xmax_aborted` gives similar information about xmax transaction state.

### Commit
* Transactions are registered as "committed" via CLOG (commit log) structure.
* Stored to disc in the pgdata/pg_xact directory.
* Once transaction is marked as committed, stored in CLOG. Other transactions can check whether a certain xmin transaction has finished or not.

### Delete
* Tuple's `Xmax` column is set to the transaction ID that performs the deletion.
* `xmax_aborted` is unset.

### Abort
* Similar to mechanism to commit.
* Transaction that is aborted is set in CLOG.
* ROLLBACK is the command, but no data is rolled back. Instead:
  - All changes made by the aborted transaction remains in place.
* Transaction status is checked, and tuples receives `xmax_aborted` hint.
* Ignored by rest of the databased for reads and writes.

### Update
* Delete and Insert in place.
* New tuple is inserted containing `Xmin` with current Transaction ID.
* `Xmax` of previous TUPLE version contains current Transaction ID.
* `xmax_aborted` is unset (Until/IF transaction is aborted)

<br /><br/>

## 3.4 Indexes
* Indexes do not use row versioning
* Index row headers do not contain xmin, xmax
* Index entries point to all versions of the corresponding table row.

<br /><br/>

## 3.5 TOAST
* A regular table with it's own separate versioning.
* Independent on row versions of the main table.
* When a tuple is created/updated in the main table with no change in long values stored in TOAST, new tuple will reference existing toast value.
* When long value is updated, PG will create a new tuple in the main table and new "toasts".

<br /><br/>

## 3.6 Virtual Transactions
* Read-Only Transactions that have no affect on row visibility.
* Given a "virtual XID" at first, exists only in RAM and can be re-used (no synchronization required)
* Virtual XID: process ID + Seq Number.
* Once Transaction modify's data, it receives an actual unique ID.
